
7G: Fractals and Shape Grammars

https://scratch.mit.edu/studios/33129 [Fractal Gallery]


--2-- File 97
In this video, we discuss fractal geometry and Shape Grammars

--3-- File 98
Fractal geometry describes repeating patterns that reduce in size. These types of patterns are seen in nature and can be used to create realistic, and just plain interesteing objects in computer graphics.

--4-- File 99
Benoit Mandelbrot, a polish-born, French-American mathemetician coined the term fractals. He did much research in regular patterns that are often observed naturally.  We use this term in computer graphics for objects that generally match this definition.

Fractals exhibit self-similarity. If you zoom in on fractals, you observe the same patterns, just on a smaller scale. 

Fractals also describe objects that are self-affine, meaning that they exhibit the same patterns but may be offset in different directions. 

--5-- REDO [9]
A simple, classic fractal geometry example is the von Koch (coke) snowflake curve.

This 2D pattern simply replaces every line segment with four line segments. The original segment is divided into thirds with the middle replaced with two segments forming a regular triangle shape extending in the positive direction of the original segment.

This is repeated for every line segment until a desired level is reached, or subsequent levels would not contribute above some threshold.

--6a-- REDO [10]
Self-similarity is associated with the fractal dimension. If the shape is replaced by N parts, the fractal dimension is log-of-N divided by log-of-1-over-r, the scale of N is in relation to the original shape. 

It is easiest to understand this using the example of the von Koch (coke) snowflake. The snowflake pattern begins as a line segment, a 1-dimensional shape. Each fractal step extends the line segments beyond this single dimension, but not exactly orthogonal, as the triangle shape only puts a bump on the segment. The line segment is broken up and replaced by 4 parts, and each major part is only one-third of the original segment.  The fractal dimension is log(4) over log(1/(1/3)) or log(4) over log(3), which evaluates to approximately 1.26.

--6b-- REDO [13]
So you see that the dimension is more than 1, but less than two.

You can extend this to 2 and 3 dimensions. A square can be divided into N parts, each being the square root of N in size.  A cube can be divided into N parts, each being the cubed-root of N in size.

--7-- File 105
Statistical self-similarity can be applied to non-regular shapes, like those seen in nature. Examples like coastlines and clouds look like they exhibit strong fractal rules, but only on a larger scale, not as an exact repeating pattern.

You can determine the fractal dimension by taking samples of the extended pattern and taking the average.

A coastline typically has a fractal dimension between 1.15 and 1.25, and terrain typically has a fractal dimension between 2.15 and 2.25

--8-- File 106
Julia and Mandelbrot sets are famous examples of fractal geometry because of their repeated, bizarre patterns.

Julia discovered this pattern in the early 1900s, but research effectively halted until Mandlebrot's research in the 1980s coupled with the computer graphics ability to visualize it.

The fractal pattern is that x becomes x-squared plus c, where x is a complex number.  'a' and 'b' are dimensions in the complex number space, and the modulus is the distance of the complex coordinate from the origin. The repeated squaring will converge to 0, 1, or infinity depending on if the modulus is greater than, less than, or equal to one. 

The slide at the beginning of this video shows a mandelbrot set.

--9-- File 111
Fractals and fractal concepts are used to model natural phenomena like clouds, water, trees, and so forth, and can also be used to create terrain.

Fractal sampling patterns can be applied to a noise function to create deterministic, yet natural-looking objects. You can use brownian motion, a random walk, to introduce some randomness to fractal patterns to create more natural looking objects.  This is often applied to terrain generation.

Fractal concepts have also been used in music to alter or even generate sound.

--10-- File 113
This is an image of a plant object created using shape grammar rules.

--11-- File 116
A shape grammar, or L-system, is a structure based on a set of rules, that can be applied to plant-like models for use in computer graphics.  I haven't seen too many resources for this type of modeling, and most text books omit it entirely.  Often this technique is mentioned along with other fractal geometry techniques.

The basic concept is to take a basic shape, and add layers that extend off of the branches of the initial shape, then repeat this pattern until a desired shape is achieved.

Fractal patterns, like trees, leaves, snowflakes, etc., can be defined by a set of L-system rules.

This concludes this video.

