--2--
This module focuses on real-time shadow techniques. This video is an introduction, setting up terms and concepts for the rest of the videos in the module. 

The shadows techniques that we introduced in Module 2 for ray-tracing mostly do not apply for real-time applications.

--3--
Among the topics we cover in this module are stencil buffers, planar projected shadows, shadow volumes, which utilize the stencil buffer, and shadow mapping.

We also briefly discuss prelit shadows using textures and planar reflections.

--4--
On our steps towards realism, shadows are a natural extension of shading and texturing that we have already been using. These provide local information about the objects in view. 

--5--
This image is from an early version of this course using application-based renderers.  You can see that shadows suffer from aliasing just like texture mapping, and self-shadowing, which we will discuss in a later video.

--6--
Without shadows, our peception of depth, or distance between objects can be incorrect. They serve as visual cues.  Otherwise, objects can appear to float, or be misaligned with respect to each others.

Shadows add a sense of realism. A lack of shadows or incorrect shadows is even used to indicate a fake or computer-generated image.

Shadows are also used for dramatic effects, just like in other media.

--7--
A shadow is created when a light source casts light onto an occluder, and a receiving object displays a sudden change of brightness from the light source.

As you can see in the image on the right, the Umbra is part of the receiver where no light from the light source is in direct view, and the Penumbra is the part of the receiver that receives partial light from the source.  The penumbra surrounds the umbra and is a gradual transition from light to dark.

A hard shadow has a small penumbra, or no penumbra at all, and a soft shadow has a large, or at least noticeable, penumbra.

The size of the light source surface, the size of the occluder, and the distances between the light source, occluder and receiver, all influence the sizes of the umbra and penumbra. 

--8--
It also turns out that we are very forgiving when it comes to the shape of shadows. For this reason, many early video used incorrect shadow shapes, like an oval on the ground, just to add the realism effect.

Our point light model assumes an infinitely small light source, which produces only hard shadows.

Shadows are dependent on the light sources with respect to the objects in the scene, making them view-independent. This means that shadow can be computed and reused for static scenes, only needing updates when the light sources or scene objects are updated.

--9--
Shadows in real-time graphics presents two major obstacles, the shape of a shadow is highly dependent on the surfaces on which it is cast, and the intensity of the light inside the shadow requires some knowledge of global illumination.

Our typical rendering pipeline is view-dependent, and only has knowledge of the current geometry, and of course the framebuffers, but they don't have enough information to determine shadows.

Therefore, shadow generation requires a preliminary rendering pass, whether it is precomputed offline, or done in a multi-pass renderer.

--10--
The real-time illumination models, like Blinn-Phong reflection, does not account for objects globally, only surfaces and light sources.

We already covered how to account for other objects using ray-tracing and radiosity, but those are too expensive for most real-time renderers.

The algorithms we will discuss do not affect the reflection models we are currently using per se.  However, extra steps may result in the scaling of the reflection model's light contribution.

--11--
The algorithms we will discuss were developed to fit within the framework of the rendering pipelines we are currently using. There is no simple way to create shadows that anybody has yet discovered, so most of the techniques will feel somewhat forced, but use some of the hardware features in interesting ways, not necessarily the way they were originally intended.

Shadows are a kind of hidden surface removal technique, only with respect to light, not the viewer.

Finally, you should note that these algorithms are not easy, and are subject to many of their own problems, which we shall see.

This concludes this video.
